# cs465-fullstack
CS-465 Full Stack Development with MEAN

The Travlr application is a travel web application. It was developed for the Full Stack I course at SNHU within the computer science program. It uses the MEAN stack to accomplish its goals. The main application is built using Express and Node.js. The backend uses MongoDB to store the data necessary for the application. An Angular SPA is used with the rest of the stack to create the admin side of the application. This application is developed as a prototype meaning it does not have everything set up to take full advantage of the MEAN stack throughout the application.

How it is currently, it focusses on the trip aspect of the application. Users can view information about different trips. The admin of the application can add new trips and update trip information using the SPA. The ideas and methods used for this small part of the application could be used to finish the rest of the application by adding information about the rest of the pages in the Travlr website. 

This application is built using JavaScript. The main customer facing application is built using Express. The admin side of the application is bult as an SPA using Angular. The biggest difference between an Angular application and an Express application is that the Angular application is an SPA. This means it loads everything in one page on the browser which reduces the amount of time it takes to go from one section of the website to another. Speed is one of the main advantages of using an SPA after it is loaded in the browser, tough the initial load will be longer. For the Express application each page will only have to load a small amount of data, perfect for a user browsing the website. The SPA is used for the admin part of the website because more data will be needed for the admin functionality. A disadvantage is that security needs to be a little more creative to ensure unauthorized users do not have access to data they aren't supposed to have. 

The backend uses MongoDB, a NoSQL database. One reason MongoDB was chosen is that it creates documents instead of using tables to store the information. These documents are stored using Binary JSON which works well with JavaScript. This way anyone learning about the application will have less to learn especially if they already know JavaScript. 

A custom API was created using Express to interact with the database. This was done so any part of the application can interact with this API to use the database. This is done with the Angular SPA. Having each part interact with one API to access the database cuts back on the amount of code needed to make the application run. 
Express is used with Handlebars to help create templates for the data to display in. Information can be pulled from the database about different trips and be displayed in the same way for the users to view. Handling the HTML in this way helps reduce the amount of code needed just like the custom database API. 

Setting up the API that interacts with the database was done before adding any security features. This was done to make it easier to test the API. Testing took place using Postman to send requests of different types to ensure the request performed the proper function in the database. These requests are GET, PUT, POST, and DELETE requests. GET requests pulls data from the database and is used throughout the application to set up the views in both Angular and Express. The PUT request is used to update documents in the database. POST requests add a new document to the database and DELETE will remove data from the database. This is all handled using the custom API taking advantage of Mongoose to perform the proper function in the database. 

Additional care must be taken using the PUT, POST, and DELETE methods. For this reason, security was added so a user had to log in to be able to use these methods. The security set up is basic and not quite enough to ensure the application would be secure in a live web environment, but it is a good start to this.

Developing this application gave me more practice using JavaScript which is a crucial language to know in the current Software Engineering job market. I have found building web-based applications to be one of the favorite areas in computer science. Learning the different frameworks while building the MEAN stack will also be important moving forward in my career.
